Hello, and welcome back to Chapter 2.
In this we're going to dive a little
more in depth on the atoms,
the nuggets,
the little pieces that make up Python.
And then we're going to work though
our first real program that
has a sort of beginning, middle, and end.
So, here we go.
A big part of any programming
language is the syntax for constants.
The nice thing about this
it's kind of instinctive.
So, like a 123 or 98.6, numbers both
integer and floating point numbers.
We've been using this on calculators.
They make a lot of sense to us.
The kind of constants that are a little
bit different are things like string
constants.
So "Hello world" is a string constant.
We use that so
that our program can say nice things
to people that are using our program.
And so, we call them constants
because they don't change but
it's kind of obvious, constants.
It's just a piece of the language,
so that's a constant.
What else?
Variables and reserved words.
So the other thing other than
constants are reserved words.
And as I said in a earlier lecture,
these are like dog language.
Blah, blah, blah, blah, class.
Blah, blah, blah, del.
Blah, blah, blah, else.
Blah, blah, blah, lambda.
So these are words that when
you say them to Python,
Python expects them to mean exactly
what Python wants you to mean.
Now, why is this special?
It's actually kind of instinctive. It just
means don't use these for other things.
Don't name functions, don't name classes,
don't name variables.
Places where you get choices to use words.
Don't use these words. And
most of them aren't too big of a problem.
I don't know, maybe break or
in, or from, maybe.
Some of these you might naturally use.
Most of them are kind of weird enough that
you're probably not going to use them
as variable names.
And so
the third atom basically is variables.
And you get to pick the variable names.
And it's a little weird that you
get to pick variable names, but
you'll get used to it.
And so variable names are places where
you're asking Python to allocate
a bit of memory and stick something
in it and you're choosing the label.
And so if we take a look at this.
When we have this assignment statement,
and remember that assignment statements
always have a direction, right?
Think of these equal signs
as having an arrow on them.
In some languages, I saw a language that
uses kind of an arrow that uses a less
than and a dash as the assignment.
I went, that's how it should be
because equal confuses us.
Because equal means something different in
mathematics than it does in Python
or other programming languages.
So look at this very first statement.
What we're really saying is,
it's a pretty complex statement.
After a while, you'll just use it.
Python, find us a spare piece
of memory somewhere and
give it a label of x, and put 12.2 in it.
And remember that,
remember all that stuff.
That's one of things that Python does for
us, it remembers stuff.
Then we go to the second statement.
It says oh, hey Python, find some spare
memory that you got laying around,
label it y and put 14 into that, okay?
And so that's how these things work and
you chose x and you chose y.
Now if we keep on going in this code, and
now we have another line and
we say oh, hey, x, wait a sec.
I already told you about x,
x already exists so don't go out and
grab any new memory, but stick 100 in that.
So 100 goes in and
it wipes out the old value.
So, that's what happens.
When this sequence starts,
this happens first, second, third.
And so
the third thing is the last thing and
so x ends up with a residual
value of 100 in it.
So that's kind of variables and
assignment statements.
You have some naming rules.
You can start variable names with letters
or underscores, although we avoid
underscores because Python tends to use
underscores for its own internal purposes.
And the rest of it can be letters,
numbers, and underscores.
And it's case sensitive.
But we don't want you to depend on that.
So, spam all lowercase,
Spam with one uppercase, and SPAM.
These all are different variable names but
you're not doing anybody any favor
if you think that's being clever.
We tend to sometimes use uppercase to
signal things, which we'll talk about
later, but we tend to use mostly lowercase.
Some applications use what's
called camel case, which is a mix.
But you tend not to depend on
the fact that these are unique
because you really are misleading
the person who's reading your code.
But we have some good ones, spam,
eggs, spam 23, numbers are fine.
It's fine to start with a underscore.
It's bad to start with a number.
It is bad to start with a pound sign,
although that turns into a comment, and
you can't use characters other than
letters and numbers in the variable.
And so those are all good variable names.
Now we lead these things into
sentences or lines.
And so these things.
This is just another sequence of code, and
it shows how you can also use
the variable on the right-hand side.
So put 2 in some memory and label it x.
Pull that 2 back out and then add 2 to it.
So this little thing here becomes 4.
And then stick 4 into x.
And then this is a print function.
And the way functions work is
they are the name of a function,
followed by a parenthesis,
followed by another parenthesis.
And then you can print something,
what you want to print.
And so, this causes on some
output 4 to come out.
So, print is the function that
you call to cause output.
Now I emphasize that one of the key
things about variable names is that you
get to name them.
And we have a technique called mnemonic.
I think I pronounced that right.
And the idea is that when
you choose a variable name,
you should choose a variable
name to be sensible and
Python doesn't care whether you choose
mnemonic variable names or not.
And the name that you choose for
a variable does not communicate any
additional information to Python, okay?
So when you're a beginning student,
sometimes if you use variable names
that are too good it's confusing.
So you'll notice as I write, especially in
these first two chapters, some of my code
uses really dumb variable names and
some of them uses really clever ones.
So I go back and forth to emphasize to you
that the name of the variable as long it's
consistent within a program doesn't
matter, and Python is perfectly happy.
So here is a little code.
It's four lines of code.
And start at the top, run this line and
that says find a little piece of memory
and label it that thing and
stick 35 in it.
Find a little piece of memory and
label it that thing, stick 12 in it.
Pull that first thing out and
pull the second thing out,
multiply them together, and
put them yet into a third variable.
If you look at these things really
closely, they're all unique and
distinct, and
you do have to look at them very closely.
Then you print the third thing out.
And Python loves this code.
Python thinks great.
I don't know why you picked those variables,
I do not care.
All I care is that they're unique.
Python really has no opinion
about these variables.
But if you hand this code to a friend and
then you say,
what is this code doing there?
They're like, why did you pick
such insane variables?
because I have to stare at it and like,
the difference between like these
two things is just the letter z and
the letter p.
So this one we're pulling
the p guy out and
this time we're pulling the z guy out,
right?
And these two just have a difference
of those letters, I think.
I mean, you could do it.
Python loves this stuff.
To Python this is perfectly
understandable code.
To human beings it is not
perfectly understandable code.
So like people aren't going to like you,
but Python is going to be very,
very happy.
I can't draw a happy snake,
otherwise I would draw a happy snake.
So, this is tacky, bad, not friendly.
So, let's make it a little more friendly.
You could choose variable names.
To those, Python looks at these two
things as like, those are the same.
They're totally the same,
Python doesn't care.
But now we can look at it and go,
I see. The first variables is a and
we're putting that a thing there and
the second variables is b.
We're putting the b thing there. And then we're
multiplying them and going to put them in a c thing
and then we're printing the c thing out.
That's pretty nice.
So this is a little better, right?
At least we can parse it and read it and
understand what the code is going to do
without having to check to see if these
two characters are the same or different.
So that's better but
it's not mnemonic, okay?
Mnemonic means that we choose
a variable name that makes sense for
what we're using it for.
Again, the variable name and Python looks
at all these three things as the same.
All Python cares is that this
matches this, this matches that and
that matches this.
But, humans are much happier.
Humans are much happier.
Now, we understand mentally that
the first variable 35 was the hours.
The second was the rate per hours and then
we computed a pay and we printed it out.
So this is really understandable.
The problem is for beginning programmers,
it sometimes is too understandable, right?
It's too understandable.
Right?
Huh? Python knows about payroll?
Because if I name a variable hours,
shouldn't Python know
that that means hours?
And if I name a variable pay does that
mean that Python knows about this?
And the answer is, no.
Python treats all these three as equal.
Python doesn't look at the name
of your variables and think, hey,
you just had a bug, right?
So what if, for example, I rewrote this
code and I said hours times hours.
And it's like wouldn't Python
say hey that doesn't make sense.
Why would you even multiply it
in a payroll calculation?
Why would you multiply hours times hours?
And the answer is, Python
will happily do it
because it's not looking at those words.
But a human being who's trying to
understand what your code is or
trying to help you, when you're
writing code debug your code,
will be very thankful that
you chose good names.
And now I can look at your code, and if I
see you say pay equals hours times hours,
like, why did you multiply
hours times hours?
Didn't you really mean to
multiply hours times rate?
So mnemonic variables are only for
humans.
We will later see things that will
confuse you when I name one variable
friend and another one friends.
And you'll be like, so
Python understands plurals?
And the answer is no, Python
doesn't understand plurals, okay.
It's really helpful to read stuff, so that
when something has more than one thing in
it, you might maybe use a variable
that's got a plural in it.
So, okay, enough about that.
I hope I made my point.
These are all the same to Python, but
human beings certainly prefer
the second or the third.
And so, but be careful.
And after Chapter 10,
you'll start using mnemonic variables and
it won't be a problem.
But in the first few chapters,
you have to worry about it.
So as I mentioned, assignment statements
basically are not like mathematics.
Equal sign means equality.
Assignment statements means arrow.
And the key thing is you can almost think
of this as like there's a little wall
there and it completely
computes this expression.
This is an expression,
on the right-hand side,
gets that down to a single variable and
then writes it into the memory location.
And that's why it's possible to have
the same variable on both sides
because this side happens first,
ignoring this side.
And then once this side is done, then it
actually puts it into that other side.
And so, if, for example, x before
the statement started, had a 0.6 in it.
It like firewalls this part off, and
it computes this part here by
pulling the 0.6, the old value of x,
doing the computation, running through
the things, getting the new value.
And then after it's got that new value,
then, and only then,
does it store the 0.936 into x and that
overwrites the 0.6 that was in x, okay?
And so one side finishes, produces
a result, and then it can overwrite.
It doesn't mean you have to put
the variable on both sides.
But it's why you can put it.
So sometimes we'll say
something like x = x + 1.
And that's our way of adding 1 to x.
And that's because whatever x is, maybe
x is 6 or something, this becomes a 7.
And then the 7 goes into x and
then it overwrites it to the 7.
We call this increment.
We'll see this soon, okay?
But that's why you can put the same thing.
Now in mathematics, x = x + 1
makes absolutely no sense one but
in programming, it is one of
the more common things that we do.
Okay, so that gets us through variables and
constants and
now we're going to talk a little bit
more in detail about expressions.